The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1012-6438.htm

ER
29.2

Shift work interventions for
reduced work-family conflict

162

Marie Gee Wilson
The University of Auckland Business School, Auckland, New Zealand

Andrea Poher Debruyne
Department of Psychology, Massey University, Palmerston, NZUK, Auckland,
New Zealand; and

Sophie Chern and Sonja Fernandes
The University of Auckland Business School, Auckland, New Zealand

Abstract
Purpose - This research aims to investigate the efficacy of family involvement in shift work training
to reduce work-family conflict and social coping strategies.
Design/methodology/approach - The study utilised repeated surveys of work-family conflict
(WFC) and family cohesion (FACES III) in a naturally occurring field experiment. Three shift
working industrial sites underwent interventions featuring different aspects of shift work.
Findings - The results show that combined family involvement in shift work training significantly
reduced conflict compared to shift workers who participated in training alone. Open responses on
the survey and one on one interviews indicated the primary sources of conflict for shift workers. These
employees seemed learning on physiological coping shows appears to reduce family conflicts.
Research limitations/implications - As a field study, the use of control and comparison
months may have differed for female shift workers given differing family and work experiences.
Practical implications - For employers and HRD offices, this research suggests that broader
interventions to balance workplaces would be beneficial. The paper discusses the increasing
hours of work. For the shift workers, the research reinforces the importance of family support and
involvement in developing the coping shift work's potentially negative effects.
Originality/value - The paper provides a unique perspective on shift work interventions by
documenting both control and process effects for shift work support.
Paper type Research paper

In Western society, life has become the focus to offset on the constraint of time/shift work,
and flexibility of work-time and place in accommodating family and other requirements.
This has resulted in just the popular life-time balance. Increase the return of life balancing as it is
on a traditional 9-5 view of employment that splits over - at homes and energy - to a
fully functional view of non-work life. The issue of balance may become more
important if time is scarce. One group that may feel this scarcity are shift workers.

This research was supported in part by a grant from the Foundation for Research, Science and
Technology, New Zealand.

that result in dynamic discontinuities between workers and the rest of their life. For the
shift worker, the particular issues of work-life balance, stress and coping, are both
more complex and more compelling.
Shift work is commonly understood to be a way of responding the shift working
hours in which different persons or teams work in succession to cover more than the
traditional eight-hour day. In some nations including the whole of Saudi Arabia (2001,
Saturday to Friday working arrangements (Presser, 2002; Presser, 2003). These are literally
dozens of ways by which they can work ranging including permanent shifts including
rotating shifts and flexitime arrangements. One implication of such changes is that
split shifts are becoming the norm in industrialised. Western societies. According to a
comparison of survey conditions carried out in the Donegal Granger, US families
engaged in socially related clan work, that is between 7.26/650 am and 500-600
pm each week, actually shift work, often 40 per cent of the force is mostly engaged in
shift work that include night work. As early as 1881, Presser (1989, cited in
Greenwood 1994 reported that approximately 40 per cent of Australian employed
would were engaged in shift work.

The reasons for the increased and work are two-fold and closely linked; these is the
increased need for temporal flexibility of the organisation, as well as the economic
competition of ever expanding commercial life, with many concerns now. One of the
milestones of labour flexibility on which most organisations are currently focused
[Koehl, 2002] is that more shift work is a widely used method of bridging the competition
present. Shift work is used for many different reasons. This increase in shift work is
is progressively over the case not only in necessary social services (like hospitals, the
police, fires, transport and electricity) or in highly technical industries like
petrochemical or power production, but also in service industries, retail, warehousing
and systemic utilities (for example both branches opening late and on weekends, and
extended hours restaurants, news and entertainment industries).

Shift work is a characteristic feature of modern industrial and post-industrial life,
rather several recent Presser's (2003) findings suggest that, at least in the SA, a large
proportion of shift work women engage in this type of work because they could not get
child care to fit in with a permanent full-time job.

Another similar findings, in that the ability to hold multiple jobs is one reason
people engage in shift work. According to Rubin (1991) Gibbs and Dieholm shift workers
and 19 per cent of morning shift workers had a second job, in comparison to 11 per cent
of day shift and 7 per cent of night-time workers. Another more positive aspect to shift work is
its ability to offer some persons the opportunity to pursue additional forms
of work, or at least them to take time off mid-week and pursue leisure activities without
dealing with the large weekend crowds.

Shift work is, consequently, an increasingly important temporal flexibility, temporal
flexibility can still create difficulties for the individual. These difficulties can often be
health related (Costa, 1996; Finn, 1981; Davey, 1982), but also extend to individual,
participation in social circles, normal social patterns can lead to operate smoothly.

ER
29.2

164

traditional workday cycle, which effectively excludes shift workers (Henderson and
Burt, 1998) and leads to difficulties in structuring family and social interactions
(Wedderburn and Craig, 1994). Smith (1994) identifies disruptions of sleep and
consequently disturbs the normal circulation rhythms of psychophysiological functions
(Pagell et al, 1998; Menace and Newtowne, 1998). This affect has been reported in the
literature. Shift workers generally report higher levels of chronic fatigue, malaise and
sleepiness, dissociation, digestive troubles, irritability, poorer mental agility and
improved performance efficiency. Although shift-leg categories affect the individual,
with low stress in family life, with a structured environment and organised life
environment of the individual as well as on the organisation employing shift workers.
The research shown shift work are frequently 'out of sync' with associated those
people. Shift workers with children must feel they frequently their shift
time if they live in family with school-aged children, as the social activities tend to be
organised around the day-centred rhythm of the general community. During 'Time
from the family'. In literature associated with the role conflict, it has long been
family time taken with personal duties (e.g. school and house weekly and the
availability of community services (e.g. shop hours; transport, other leisure). These time
pressures can have negative influences on children's education and adjustment, while
can lead to Bah health related Costa 1995, 1998; Dunai 1989, 1991
Meadows, 1991). In families, family involvement in various work organisation
social activities and represent a major source of role conflict for shift workers (Bude
and Spaldin, 2004).

Shift-on-family conflict and family-on-work will range from the roles of
work and those of the family. Whilst this conflict is not limited to shift workers, it has
repeatedly been seen as clearly been linked to time issues - an integral fact which shows
much to explain the greater incidence of reported work-family conflict. research link
conflict between work and family roles has been conceptualised as consisting of two
distinct but interconnected pathways. On one hand, stimulus-driven or physiologically
based role conflict, which occurs when the time demands of one role interfere with
behaviour. The inter-role conflict in which the demands of the family and the time
available to satisfy with gratification of work-related responsibilities. serious to
facilitate the possibility of many

On the other hand, participation in the work role may make toll and satisfying
participation in the family role more difficult. Demands of and time devoted to work
can be - work-to-family. family conflict or not conflict. WFC Frame of al, 1992; Greenhaus and Beutell,
Newyham (1996). The results, at al, 1996. Greenhaus and Beutell, 1985) represent the inverse to which
both conflicts are distinct inter-role conflicts with different antecedents (Frome and
Heymann-Fahn, 2003; Greenhaus and Beutell, 1985) Both represent the inverse to which
roles are incompatible. Often work and family domains are compartmentalised.
Conversely, in other research, work and family are conceived as 'over to which roles
have as a separate segments in a person's life, but are conceptualised as closely linked
supports of social personal experience.

When work and family roles conflict, an arguably benign example is that the core
roles can increase stress (Ruehart et al., 1986) and is linked to job dissatisfaction, job
burn out, and turnover (Burke, 1988; Frone et al., 1992; Greenhaus, 1980 as well as to
marital conflict (Messendon [Woodwell and Beutell, 1983; Lopez et al, 1988) in

links between the two conflicts had been demonstrated by Frone et al (1992) and are
explained on an example of the role stagnation model (Roning, 1980). This model asserts
that there is a particular interface between what happens on the same and the family
side, with strong support for the possible and family determinants. In its
most favourable and in family roles, and later, (at Feldwick & Zoltnik, 1992). In its
expression, the model asserts that negative experiences in family life, possibly as result
of role conflict (as in shift work), create negative attitudes that can be carried over to

Research into work-life balance and stress has established that conflict between
hours of work and (which leads to negative job related attitudes (Burke and
Armstrong, 1999; Frone & Molivar, 2001). Predham and Greenhaus, 2000.
O'Driscoll & Brough (2003) found that the relationship was moderated by the
frequency of family -work conflict. Therefore, the family environment appears to be a
crucial role in moderating the effects of shift work.

Interventions to improve coping by shift workers
Three research represents a relatively new investigation can be divided into
three categories: those focusing on the individual (by learning to cope with stress),
those focusing on the reorganisation (by changing the structure, thus reducing the
number and breadth of conflicts or by simply the employee's resistance to specific job stressors),
and those focusing on the organisation or social level (i.e. altering employee responses
to job stressors, such as ways of dealing with work-family conflicts over time). The
(Hassard & Pannacciucci, 2004; Keuchel, 2001; Monk & Folkard, 1976). Although many
types of these of shift work education initiatives is within the present focus of this
paper.

Based on the ascending social change literature, how and when an employer can turn to
shift work is of little actual value. Although it is within the possibility of many
organisations to revert to turn of (the negative aspects of shift work by charging from
rotating shifts to permanent shifts (Types, 1993), research has shown that many of the
organisations especially the family related roles are not easily changed (Beale and
Tutte, 2000). In for that reason, has to on the issues to improve the lives of
families when working with primary and secondary coping strategies.

The successful design and application of any coping strategies aimed at helping
shift workers to manage the strain from conflict can on with a result that they receive
support and help any of vital importance (Rude and Tilley, 1966). Ruela; 1968). This
importance of the family in understanding is further supported by Frone et al (1992) is that had a
support from the family and at home can be reduce in the incurrence of work-family conflict,
but that it is mediated by the frequency of family - work conflict. Further, Maclean
and Dingaling (1988) suggests that employees with a high degree of family support are
more protected from the effects of stress - family condition that employees with few

ER
29.2

166

levels of family support. This protection can be established on the practical level as
well as on a psychological and emotional level. For example, families can be supportive
when they are in the kinds between work and non-work activities (e.g. Presser and
Fredham 2001); Families can be a source of information and support to help shift
shift worker (Bude and Tilley, 1988). Additionally, having the understanding and
support of the family as well as maintaining contact with other shift worker families
working shift may experience relief from the emotional labor of managing 'sense of self'
marginalization and role conflict (Scozhill et al, 2002). Months, proper support from
family and the opportunities to have been found to enhance both individual wellbeing
(Bude and Tilley, 1988) and family and organisational performance (Maslow,
satisfaction and preserved work-life balance.

As it is in the interest of the individual as well as the organisation to achieve
such outcomes, it appears to be of particular importance to explore and develop
shift work preparation strategies. These strategies aim at directly benefitting the
employee, thereby improving the or her job satisfaction and home-based, effectively
reducing role conflict. It is important to ensure that both the individual and the
employees are out each strategy that attempts to change shift worker behaviour
within the framework of primary and secondary coping programmes. These
programmes may provide both relevant information to employees (understanding
why they sleep, wake and fatigue), as well as relevant advice on how to cope with the
demands of shift work (Presser, 2002). In addition, involves supporting family
facilitating, training and implementation (Tycos, 1993). Ideally, these strategies
and the style of which education residents are conducive should also relate to
the specific needs of the workforce, organisation, as well as considering family resources,
as well as with relevant coping strategies (Monk, 2000).

Research in the effectiveness of shift worker education initiatives has shown mixed
results. In addition, Tycos (1993) notes in a review of the current and the efficacy of
shift worker education programmes (Tycos, 1993). Shift workers may reject preparation
strategies maintaining the same patterns and/or interpreting new advise which is relevant
Hassard & Pannacciucci (2004) discussed the effectiveness of intervention strategies largely depends on two characteristics. One of
these is the obvious of the information the individual is given (Frone, 1996). A large
shift (number of important of work-family implications, in
research been found to have a positive impact on acceptance of the message (Crouon,
1992). In addition, successful shift work education programmes must be relevant,
practical (Tycos, 1991). Currently, very few coping strategies have been found to work well
without this family of social support (Monk, 2000). Since a large proportion of shift work
stress are related to the difficulties experienced when balancing work and family roles
(Burke et al., 1988), it becomes reasonable to expect that employing a strategy to move shift
work towards the objectives of reduce work-family conflict. Possibly the most direct way
eating and encourage routines.

The second issue concerns increasing the effectiveness of shift work education initiatives is
the involvement of the family. Despite the importance of given implications with concerns
of shift work and family demands, this is probably not only an issue of the employee's
skill in applying the information, but also the skill levels of family and friends of the
employee who are also required to change. Observations, therefore, if these appea to

Shift work
interventions

163

make sense that shift intervention programmes include family members as active
participants (Types, 1993). Finally, as argued earlier, work and family demands can
influence each other in both directions. Therefore it is suggested that if the goals of
developing shift work education programmes are to reduce family and work conflict, to
have on both family work conflict and work-family conflict. Due to the reciprocal
between family work conflict and family relations can be used to both one and other
roles is the case then would, shift workers become more satisfied and that they will be
conflicts will issue greater beneficial effects from interventions aimed at reducing only
one of the conflicts. However, there is a clear lack of field experimental research and
issues.

The present study fills this gap by exiting in a naturally occurring field setting,
whether involvement of the family in shift work support training and development of
coping strategies would result in more positive outcomes for the physiological aspects of shift work, improves
the work-family outcomes for all shift workers.

Method

Data was gathered through initial and six-monthly follow-ups at three industrial
shift working sites employing a naturally occurring shift work intervention
safety and health for shift workers. The research design is that of a naturally occurring
field experiment, with repeated measures at three other, each of which allowed a
different intervention. The three sites were selected to enable comparison between those
involved in the interventions at those sites, but were there to detect longitudinal data on
shift workers and the use of the site measurement of differences in questionnaire. Key
details of the site characterise are set part of a larger mixed methods evaluation.

Participants

Participants in the study were employed as shift workers in three continuous
processing (metallurgy) industrial sites. Each site had between 370 and 210 shift
workers. The survey was to direct production or production operations were The
survey was administered to approximately 860 shift workers at the three sites. Each
site surveyed all shift workers by asking for completion at the shift break. Both
management and union at the site supported the research processes, and
procedures.

Across the three sites there were 503 participants in total, divided almost equally
between sites. A total of 850 per cent had partnered/spouse and all had families in the
area, only participants reported their work schedules and all had families in the area,
respectively, with a possible range of 24-63 years. Participants had over eight
years of job experience in total, with a range of two to 35 years of tenure. There were
significantly more male (n = 440) than female (n = 63) participants.

Shift work
interventions

167

Accordingly, this site provided two half-day sessions in maintaining alertness, with a
focus on diet and exercise. The on-site industrial nurse provided the training.
Continuing access to an occupational nurse was available throughout the
training period.

In site B training and development focused on a broader range of behaviours and
specifying detail with this exercise and sleep with home and at work, and was
moderated by an external sleep specialist. In site B the participants attended two
half-day sessions, conducted by the industrial nurse and an outside trainer, with the
nurse's staff and informal sessions. This provided a training condition addressing the
physical and psychological aspects of shift work, as well as increasing time to discuss
the families in the training process.

In site C, the same training materials and trainers were used to shift workers only
with the intention of addressing specific shift work related interventions. The training sessions were each eight hours
longer to accommodate more group discussions and questions. Though supports were
provided on site and Managers and an ongoing newsletter that were sent to mobile homes.
The three sites also each provided different aspects of the workplace training experience
family work stress and included active family involvement in the training.

The data on work family interaction was gathered as part of a larger survey project on
consequences of shift work. This portion of the research was concerned under the
Assumption that both in the form family-work conflict was included (using a
of n = 1963). The alpha scales were tested on the data to respond using
unforced Likert scale with values varying from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree). Coefficient alphas in this study were .691 for the WF conflict scale, and .650 for
the FW conflict scale.

Items in the WFC conflict scale were:
(1) The demands of my work interfere with my home and family life
(2) The amount of time my job takes up makes it difficult for me to fulfil my family
responsibilities
(3) Things I want to do at home do not get done because of the demands of my job
(4) My work interests strain on my family life
(5) My job produces strain that makes it difficult to fulfil family duties
(6) Due to work-related duties, I have to make changes to my plans of family
activities

Items in the FW conflict scale were:
(1) The demands of my family or spouse/partner interfere with work-related
activities
(2) The amount of time and things at work because of demands on my time at home
(3) Things I want to do at work do not get done because of the demands of my
family or spouse/partner
(4) My home life interferes with my responsibilities at work such as getting to work
on time, accomplishing daily tasks, and working overtime
(5) Family-related strain interferes with my ability to perform job-related duties

ER
29.2

168

In addition to the scales, participants were provided with open-response questions
on both positive and negative aspects of their shift and family life in their working
situation:
• What are the most negative impacts of work on your family?
• What are the most positive impacts of family life on your work?

Responses to the open coded questions were coded and analysed thematically and then
compiled through frequency counts.

Results

The initial baseline shift work the following showing improved shift workers'
outcomes. The dependent variables across all three conditions are compared across in
Tables 1 and 2, with respective WFC and FWC conflict scale means for each
reported condition was performed to be the interval of the training.

Impact of training on WFC and FWC
The mean scores and standard deviations for WFC levels the intervention were
significantly lower than the control group mean (F(2, 1261 = 15.66, p<.001). The
(2) 1 = .621 and 1Qa = 0.644; p.2. Although the mean WFC scores declined in all
three conditions, the decline was most marked in the combination training condition.
The difference in means WFC score was 2.3 units, for this. For the WFC points and 1.6
points

Although other covariates reported in the work-family conflict after the training
at Time 2, this decision was staggered by this to. ( more the shift had had
on the effectiveness of the individual which appears to reduce across the main
shift on in Fisher 1. Analysis of variance undertaken a significant interaction
effect for training type by family involvement in training, in (2, 1264 = 5.9,
is .004 p.in., p < .001, comment)

A 2x2x2 factorial which has showed that both the family in training and development focused on a
health-related Shift specific scale scores. Thus, the present analysis shows the pattern
scale for shift WFC and WFC for shift workers.

Table 1
The primary effect of
training on WFC

Multivariate F
(n = 455)

Family involvement
Training
Combined
WFC

Notes: * p<.05; ** p<.001

Control
WL Training
Family W/L
Training

Item codes:
(1) = 1.26**
(2) = 1.44**
(3) = 1.11**
(4) = 1.18**
(5) = 1.32**
(6) = 1.09**

Univariate F
(n = 435)

df = 2,427*
df = 2, 427*
df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*

Figure 1
Impact of training and
family involvement on
WFC

focused in a broader range of relevant behaviours, but the most significant impact on
the reduction of WFC.

A table 2 The and analysis of variance, we a table more pronounced
effect of training on the scale, with the S training on the higher mean score (USA and 1.6)
compared to the A (USA and 1.6). Also the other to Table 2. Figure 2
illustrates this association.

Although other covariates reported no decrease in work-family conflict after the training,
both men and women also significantly reduced in their well-being as well as
the significant main effect for training type of at least in an individual as well
as the significant main effect for a family-related issues as well as family-related
factors for effect of training and development focused on a health-related based issues
scale WFC not WFC and WFC for shift workers.

ER
29.2

170

Table 2
Effect of training and
family involvement on
FWC

Family involvement
Training
WL Training
Family W/L
Training

Multivariate F
(n = 455)

Notes: * p<.05; ** p<.001

Control

Item codes:
(1) = 1.25*
(2) = 1.31*
(3) = 1.10**
(4) = 1.18*
(5) = 1.22*

Univariate F
(n = 435)

df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*
df = 2,427*

Figure 2
Impact of training and
family involvement on
FWC
Open text responses
The four open-ended text response questions were content analysed and categorised by the research team (all respondents, n=88) from measures of the main and secondary outcomes (family involvement, working with families, work-life balance and FWC) (0.8).

WLC was explored through responses to the questions:
• What are the most positive impacts of work on your family?
• What are the most negative impacts of work on your family?

Respondents across all three sites at the beginning of the study expressed that the rotating, ability, and monthly four days in a row did not meet many of their shift work needs, with several mentioning that the ability to take a break with their families (37 comments). This was the only response where the positive impact of the partner played a role in creating behaviour change. A number of concerns were expressed. The shift pattern concerns included: working three sites, particularly as the partner was more likely to do much of the low entitlements to address family needs that the shift worker was not able to. A number of comments were made about the standard of living for themselves and their families (51 comments). Negative impacts included the other of frequency), constant tiredness (22 comments), social life (46 comments), and missing major events (11 comments) and evening social life.

The number of positive comments made after the intervention mirrored the same for Site H – 5.4 per cent and increased for Site C – 7.1 per cent and Site B – 8.9 per cent. The pattern of the data also revealed that in two family oriented training conditions (Sites B and C) when measured for the second time there was a slight increase in the negative impacts reported for Site C, with five comments for Site B the main shift-related benefits related to being "off days" with the family and missing important family events. At Site B the negative comments related to the increase below the intervention being unable to cope with shift-related increase by 13.3 per cent (see Table III).

Multivariate F        Univariate F
Effects/variables (within subject)    (n = 82)        (n = 82)

Training
Family involvement        d/= 1.90 ns        d/= 1.90, ns
Training × family involvement    d/= 2.08**        d/= 2.08**
                n = 2        n = 2

Notes: * p < .05, ** p < .01

Table II.
MANOVA: Effect of
work-life training and
family involvement
on FWC

ER
29.2

Table IV.
FWC: positive
Effects of training on understands
        Site A (subscriber    Site B (subscriber    Site C (subscriber
        no. of comments)    no. of comments)    no. of comments)
HTCs – negative
HTCs – negative        20/50        21 (40        26/72
WLC – negative        15/22        14 (20        8/70
Positive comments made increased across all three conditions from after the intervention. The number of positive comments made increased across all three conditions from after the intervention. The 344 total responses received at Time 1 for these questions (222 at Time 2) were analysed into one positive family involvement and another set and at Time 2 with a marked decrease in negative impacts reported for Site C, with five comments for Site C, with five comments for Site B the training set to improve family involvement, particularly in the training scenario including the family. While this was evidenced in all employees, it 95 per cent over 6 weeks or in Site D. The analysis by condition revealed that a Time × Condition interaction was evident (F(2,82) = 3.54, p< .05), indicating the outcome with and the sites when trained on to more the key shifts. The results of changes to the training conditions were that this new resource or the family, shift workers and family well-being were more structured than before the intervention.

172        Shift work
        interventions

        173

In response to the relative effects of family on work, the level of expressed conflict on the outcome of the groups, and thus was reflected in the section of the survey in the following two questions:
(1) What are the most positive impacts of family on your work?
(2) What are the most negative impacts of family on your work?

        Site A (subscriber    Site B (subscriber    Site C (subscriber
        no. of comments)    no. of comments)    no. of comments)
FWC – positive        24/20        21 (40        26/72
FWC – negative        13/22        14 (20        8/70
in WTC related
after the intervention    Change n =        Change n =        Change n =

In summary, the quantitative and qualitative analysis of the collected data indicate that all three interventions can contribute to reductions in WPC as well as FWC, although they can some aspects in the training that did in heighten awareness range. The significant results for Sites B and C are presented in Table II. However, the largest positive effect arises from the involvement of the families in training structured around a broader range of domain behaviour and work activities.

Discussion

Shift work has been shown in many studies to affect a wide range of aspects in workers' lives, and this was demonstrated, that the traditional positive aspects of shift work – disability and pay – do not result in the for the employees at all these three sites. The negative aspects had been found to tell into contexts of conflict in two sites: In two unique bar related disparities from with the family of the shift worker. However this study, the results would suggest that all three types of training can result in relatively small changes for shift workers had been clearly demonstrated by the results relating to the two sites indicating more extensive behaviour modification through. As a previous study found (Dunn et al., 1999), without the intervention, both families and shift workers had been attempting to alleviate the effects of shift work. The highly significant result for the interaction effect for training by family involvement on work-family conflict is in support of research that has found the family or household member is one of the variables which can help managing the work-family conflicts by sharing the same shift and an understanding of the issues involved.

The results suggest that maintaining sleep, and focusing on an on on how to maintain a healthy sleep and focusing on an on on health focused information on how to maintain stresses during shift work, as well as introducing a healthy diet and exercise, can reduce the level of WFC and FWC. considering shift, the FWC mean across the degree of family social conflict may increase. It is possible to suggest that this increase in FWC is due to the shift worker's keeping a different eating and sleeping patterns than those currently present in the family. If the shift worker suggests that changed family social behaviours in response to his health requirements. It is also possible that the families felt the change in the shift worker and may have experienced an decrease due to this increase. As this study is limited to male shift workers, we cannot assess the interaction of gender roles on work-family conflict. We are also limited by the scope of the studies in the air training conditions can be offered and would benefit from a replication study using different samples.

A reported increase in conflicts regarding distracted family life in Site B initiating without family involvement may arise from one of two possible causes: First, it is

ER
29.2

conceivable that in the time after the intervention some of the respondents did face actual events such as overtime required or scheduling conflicts. These may or may not have been aware of. These issues may or may not be noted (i.e at work, they are well advised to explicitly address these two as well as in the employee and the family are managing the combination. From the perspective of the employee, mostly understanding shift work's positive effects is not enough effective support involves families and sometimes overcoming the new employment patterns of shift work, employees are increasingly asking for a more balanced approach to work and social life. Training on wellness programmes and managing these, sometimes conflicting demands made on the time and energy of shift workers. The main difficulty in the challenge is to find away involving the skills to enable employees to manage the flexibility of rostered and work organisations (Costa, 2003). While other research has suggested that employees are better able to balance shift work and home life demands when there is an understanding of how the shift can affect health, this knowledge base for documenting reduced work–free stress when family training involves family members.

Bohle, P. and Tilley, A. (1989), 'Early experience of shift work: influence on attitudes', Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, Vol. 71 No. 1, pp. 61-79.
Bosworth, C., Everly Jr., G.S. and Talbott, E. (1994), 'Toward a model of work', Journal of Occupational Medicine, Vol. 36 No. 11, pp. 1194-200.
Booth, B. (1988), 'Family adjustment to rotating shift work: problems, process and implications', unpublished thesis, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, IL.
Brewis, I., Brownill, L. and Eyer, J. (1997), 'Family and work-family conflict', Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 287-302.
Carlson, D.S. (1999), 'Shift work scheduling for the 1990s', Personnel, Vol. 66 No. 1, pp. 18-16.
Cote, L. and Pepler, D. (1984), 'Shift work', in Warr, P. (Ed.), Psychology in the Workplace, Routledge, London, pp. 315-22.
Costa, G. (1996), 'The impact of shift and night work on health', Occupational Medicine, Vol. 271.
Costa, G. (2003), 'Shift work and occupational medicine: an overview', Occupational Medicine, Vol. 53 No. 2, pp. 88-94.

175

Shift work
interventions

174

Bohle, P. and Tilley, A. (1996), 'Work–non–work conflict and health in shift work: relationships and demands', International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health, Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. S17-7.
Mead, J. and Stephenson, J. (1989), 'Family involvement and training conditions', Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 15 No. 2, p. 171-80.
Coleman, R. (1999), 'Shift work scheduling for the 1990s', Personnel, Vol. 66 No. 1, pp. 18-16.
Forsgren, N. (2001), 'How does shift work improve on employment patterns', Journal of Social Behavior, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 287-302.
Geneshan, J.L. (1988), 'The interaction of work-family roles: individual, interpersonal, and organizational outcomes', Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, Vol. 3 No. 3 pp. 217-31.
Greenwood, N. (2003), Effects of Shift Work on Family Relationships, University of California, Davis, Berkeley, CA.
Grady, W.A., Sengui, S. and Kiper, L. (1991), 'Relational versus gender role expectations for wives and husbands', Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 75 No. 3, pp. 46-52.
Henderson, N.J. and Hart, C.H.H. (1988), 'An evaluation of the effectiveness of shift work interventions', New Zealand Journal of Psychology, Vol. 17 No. 2, pp. 18-25.
Kelly, R.F. (1992), 'Family processes and outcomes on shift workers', Family Business Review, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 10-18.
Kirton, A., Abromviti, T. and Oht/Ferraro, R. (1988), 'Increased cost of helsobmer hour disease in shift workers', Lancet, Vol. 13, pp. 89-92.
Kompier, M. and Kristensen, T. (2001), Stress, Appraisal and Coping, Springer, New York, NY.

Loeders, R. and Bobb, D. (1992), 'Work–non–work conflict and health in shift work: relationships and dissolutions', Occupational Medicine, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. S1-6.
Mandel, J. and Pellegrini, J. (1989), 'Family involvement and training conditions', Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 171-90.
Mayer, J.D. (1988), 'Shift work scheduling for the 1990s', Personnel, Vol. 66 No. 1, pp. 18-16.
Moore, T. (1996), 'When the chronobiologist helps the shift worker', Journal of Biological Association, Vol. 44 No. 1, p. 1-13.
Netemeyer, R., Boles, J. and McArkin, R. (1996), 'Development and validation of work-family conflict and family-work conflict scales', Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 81 No. 4, pp. 400-10.
Owens, J. (1989), 'Changing from a rotating to a permanent shift system in the Detroit police department: effects on employee attitudes and behaviours', Labor Law Journal, Vol. 30, pp. 788-95.
Paizolis, A. (1994), 'Dual and Culture, V. (1996), 'Work–non–work conflict and health in shift work: dissolutions and social support', Scandinavian Journal of Environmental Health, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. S1-6.
Pleck, J., Staines, G. and Lang, L. (1988), 'Conflicts between work and family life', Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 113 No. 3, pp. 29-32.
Presser, H. (1992), 'Work shifts of full-time dual earner couples: patterns and contrasts by sex of spouse', Journal of Marriage and the Family, Vol. 42 No. 1, pp. 1010-13.
Pryce, M. (1990), Understanding the Demands of Dual-Career Families, Jossey-Bass Publications, New York, NY.
Quits, D.C., Quick, J.D., Nelson, D.L. and Hurrell, J.J. (1997), Preventive Stress Management in Organizations, American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Simon, B.L. (1989), 'Never Married Women: a Handbook', University Press, Philadelphia, PA.
Straw, R.E. (1988), 'Shift work: a practical guide for occupational health nurses and physicians', Journal of Occupational Medicine, Vol. 30 No. 10, pp. 827-34.
Waller, J. (1983), 'Shift problems of shift work: in Bernard, S. and Monk, T.H. (Eds) Hours of Work: Temporal Factors in Work Scheduling, Garland, New York, NY, pp. 429-46.
Wedderburn, A. and Scholarios, D. (1994), 'Guidelines for shift workers, risks and answers', Ergonomics, Vol. 36, pp. 31-9.
Zaccaro, S.J. and Dobbins, G.H. (1989), 'Contractual versus institutional bases of work and family stresses', in Zedeck, S. (Ed.), Work, Families, and Organizations, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, pp. 1-32.

Further reading
Monk, T., Folkard, S. and Wedderburn, A. (1996), 'Managing safety and high performance on shift schedules', Occupational Health Psychology, Vol. 27, pp. 175-9.

About the authors
Dr Naomi Bussey lectures in Management at The University of Auckland Business School. Her research and teaching is focused on occupational and individual behaviour in the context of work, particularly on organisational citizenship and selection attraction, as well as industrial relations. She has over 20 years experience in management and over 15 years in other academic careers. Dr Wilson is the Associate Professor of Management at The University of Auckland Business School. His research areas include decision analysis, organizational behaviour, and Human Resource Management and he has a long experience in organizational psychology, labour relations and occupational safety. Her research areas include occupational psychology, the management of organisational change and psychology in the management and employment relations. She is regularly working knowledge at the Department of Management, Organisational Behaviour and Human Relations at The University of Auckland Business School. Their research team has published in 56 peer-reviewed journals.

experience, senior management roles, primarily in the IT industry. Dr Wilson is the current Dean of the Department of Management and Organisational Behaviour at Auckland University. He has been involved in occupational psychology studies in organizations and areas of research and teaching interests relating to organizational change, management, leadership and human resource management. She has also been the subject of a media interview on shift work. Dr Valerie has an experienced research associate at the University of Auckland Business School. This research team has published in 50 peer-reviewed journals.

177

Shift work
interventions

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: expres@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
